Physics 1130 -- Computing, Data, and Science
============================================

**Instructor Information**

Instructor: Prof. Tom Kelley

Lecture Time: MR 11:45-13:25

Office: Dana 224

Office Hours: M 15:00-16:00, WF 11:00-12:00, and by appointment
(vyte.in/drkelley)

email: th.kelley\@neu.edu

**Course Description**

Introduces how to deal with data and computation problems using computer
languages commonly used in the sciences. Focuses on manipulating data,
but symbolic calculations are also covered. Intended for science majors
during the first summer, when such a course can act as a foundation for
later work.

**Course Goals and Objectives**

The goal of this course is to learn the basics of programming and data
handling in the context of problem solving in the basic sciences. We
will accomplish these goals through the programming languages of MATLAB,
Python, and Mathematica. While the syntax of each language may be
unique, the concepts carry through all computer languages. In fact,
after learning one language, it becomes easier to learn another.

Another implicit goal that I will emphasize throughout this course is
*self-sufficiency*. The ability to find resources **on your own** is an
important life skill. MATLAB, Python, and Mathematica are vast
programming languages that have added functionality seemingly every
month. This makes them very powerful but very hard to encompass all
their potential; there\'s always something new. **To master these
languages, you will need to read, learn on your own, try things and fail
at them (possibly many times), modify your approach, and then try them
again.**

However, you are not completely alone. I am a guide, and your classmates
are fellow travelers. We are all exploring this programming realm
together, using each other as resources, and learning as we trek ahead
into the fringes of our own knowledge.

**Online Resources**

There is no textbook for this class, though I will make recommendations
throughout the semester. I have gathered several links that contain
useful resources. Use them during the semester, and please share any
resources that you find with me and your fellow students. The links
below AND many others are located on the Canvas site for this course
under Links. I will add more links throughout the semester as people
find new resources.

[[http://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab]{.underline}](http://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab)

[[https://www.python.org/]{.underline}](https://www.python.org/)

[[http://vpython.org]{.underline}](http://vpython.org)

[[https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral]{.underline}](https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral)

[[http://www.python-forum.org]{.underline}](http://www.python-forum.org)

[[https://github.com/]{.underline}](https://github.com/)

In addition to using online resources, you will submit your assignments
work through the course Canvas site or through *GitHub* (more on this
later).

**Grading and Expectations**

The course will be graded from the following aspects

 | Aspect   |  Percentage |
 | ---| ---|
 | Checkpoints   |  10%   |
 | Homeworks     |  50%   |
 | Data Stories  |  15%   |
 | Final Project |  25%   |

In lieu of a final exam, a Final Project will be due in Week 14. The
Final Project should involve some computational problem in the basic
sciences that integrates a data set into the analysis. You will submit a
written report, specifying why your problem is interesting; your code;
and give an oral presentation. The topic of the final project is
entirely up to you, but subject to approval by the instructor. You may
expand on some ideas that came from homework assignments and/or data
stories. Think of possible projects throughout the semester, making
special notes of any problem that sounds interesting to you. Additional
details will be provided later in the semester.

**A topic for the Final Project must be emailed to the instructor by
class time on October 15.**

**Instructional Approach**

The instructional approach will be active learning. I will present the
highlights of a particular topic/syntax. **By no means are my
presentations an exhaustive exploration of the topic**. Students will
learn methods of data, text, and numeric manipulation by performing such
manipulations as outlined in assignments. Expect to be working during
every class. Students are encouraged to work in groups inside and
outside of class, but students are responsible for submitting their own
original work.

**Learning During the Pandemic**

Life is chaos right now. None of it is really okay. We\'re all just
pretending.

You most likely know people who have lost their jobs, have tested
positive for COVID-19, have been hospitalized, or perhaps have even
died. You all have increased (or maybe decreased) work responsibilities
and increased family care responsibilities - you might be caring for
extra people (young and/or old) right now, and you are likely facing
uncertain job prospects.

I\'m committed to ensuring that you learn everything you were hoping to
learn in this course. I will make any appropriate accommodations to help
you learn/understand the course material and finish assignments. In the
past, I have been lenient with deadlines and grading when students face
difficult challenges. Under pandemic conditions, everyone faces
difficult challenges; therefore, everyone needs to be flexible.

If you tell me you\'re having trouble, I will not judge you or think
less of you. I hope you extend me that same grace. You never owe me
personal information about your mental or physical health. However, you
are always welcome to talk to me about thing that you\'re going through.
I probably won\'t be able to help, but I can find someone who can.

If you need extra help, or if you need more time on something, or if you
feel behind or barely holding on, **don\'t suffer in silence. I will
work with you, just talk to me.Â **

**Academic Honesty**

Academic integrity is essential in science and engineering and students
in this course are expected to follow the highest standards of academic
honesty. Cheating, plagiarism, dishonesty, or other academic misconduct
will result in appropriate disciplinary action. For a detailed
statement, see the University policy on Academic Honesty found at
[[http://www.northeastern.edu/osccr/academichonesty.html]{.underline}](http://www.northeastern.edu/osccr/academichonesty.html).

**Help**

If you have trouble with understanding concepts or with homework, seek
help immediately. Please form study groups early and use my office
hours; I have them for a reason.

**Formal and Informal Accommodations**

I am committed to assisting students requiring special accommodations
for circumstances that are registered with the [[Disability Resource
Center]{.underline}](http://www.northeastern.edu/drc) (DRC), phone (617)
373-4428. If you have an accommodation letter from the DRC, please give
it to me as early as possible in the semester or as soon as you receive
the letter. If you are not formally registered with the DRC and have
anxiety, depression, learning disabilities, or other issues that affect
your ability to fully participate and learn in this class, I encourage
you to check in with me as you feel comfortable so that we can figure
out what kind of support you need to thrive in this class.

**Inclusion and Diversity**

I value all students regardless of their background, country of origin,
race, religion, gender, sexual orientation, ethnicity, or disability
status, and am committed to providing a climate of excellence and
inclusiveness within all aspects of the course. If there are aspects of
your culture or identity that you would like to share with me as they
relate to your success in this class, I would be happy to meet to
discuss. Also, if you have any concerns in this area or are facing any
special issues or challenges, I encourage you to discuss the matter with
me as you feel comfortable, with assurance of full confidentiality (only
exception being mandatory reporting of NU Academic Integrity Policy
violations and [[Title
IX]{.underline}](https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/frontpage/faq/sex.html)
sex and gender discrimination).
